---
slug: "2277"
authors: silverpill <@silverpill@mitra.social>
type: informational
status: DRAFT
discussionsTo: https://codeberg.org/silverpill/feps/issues
dateReceived: 2025-01-31
trackingIssue: https://codeberg.org/fediverse/fep/issues/485
---
# FEP-2277: ActivityPub core types

## Summary

Classification of [ActivityPub] objects.

## Rationale

ActivityPub applications often have different processing rules for actors, activities, collections and other objects. In most cases, the class of an object can be inferred from its context: object delivered to inbox is expected to be an activity, and the value of its `actor` property is expected to be an actor.

But in some cases the class can not be inferred, for example:

- The `object` of `Update` activity can be an object or an actor.
- The `object` of `Announce` activity can be an object or an activity.

Applications may use the `type` property to determine object's class, but that hinders interoperabilty because such applications would not be able to process objects with unknown types. Therefore, a different approach would be preferable.

## Core object types

[Activity Streams 2.0][ActivityStreams] standard defines [8 core object types](https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-core/#model):

- Object
- Link
- Activity
- IntransitiveActivity
- Collection
- OrderedCollection
- CollectionPage
- OrderedCollectionPage

The `Actor` type is also mentioned, but it is not a core type.

Unfortunately, definitions provided in the specification are not precise. The lack of good definitions and the exclusion of the `Actor` type make standard classification unsuitable for practical purposes. Therefore, applications may need to use a different classification.

One way to divide objects into distinct classes is to look at their properties and their connections to other objects (indicated by their properties). This approach can be used to define 5 core types:

- Object
- Actor
- Activity (includes intransitive activities)
- Collection (includes collection pages)
- Link

The next section specifies an algorithm that classifies any ActivityPub object as one of these core types by analyzing object's shape. This technique is often referred to as [duck typing][DuckTyping].

### Duck typing

The following algorithm can be used to determine the core type of the object:

1. If object has `href` property, return `Link`.
1. If object has `inbox` and `outbox` properties, return `Actor`.
1. If object has `actor` property, return `Activity`.
1. If object has `items`, `orderedItems`, `totalItems`, `partOf`, `first`, `last`, `next`, `prev` or `current` property, return `Collection`.
1. Otherwise, return `Object`.

Application of this algorithm results in non-overlapping core types. For example, an actor with `items` property is still an actor and not a collection.

The value of `type` property is not taken into consideration.

>[!WARNING]
>ActivityPub standard requires actors to have both `inbox` and `outbox` properties, but in practice `outbox` is not always present. If compatibility with non-conformant implementations is desirable, step #1 can be changed to "If object has `inbox` property, return `Actor`".

>[!WARNING]
>Pleroma [adds an `actor` property to objects that are not activities](https://git.pleroma.social/pleroma/pleroma/-/issues/3269). To make an allowance for that, the step #2 of the algorithm can be changed to "If object has an `actor` property, and doesn't have an `attributedTo` property, return `Activity`".

### Multi-typing

The alternative to duck typing is to use multiple types. For example, this object can be unambiguously identified as an `Activity`:

```json
{
  "type": ["Bite", "Activity"]
}
```

However, existing implementations don't add a second type, and even if changing all of them were possible, duck typing would still need to be used as a fallback during the transitional period.

## References

- Christine Lemmer Webber, Jessica Tallon, [ActivityPub][ActivityPub], 2018
- James M Snell, Evan Prodromou, [Activity Streams 2.0][ActivityStreams], 2017

[ActivityPub]: https://www.w3.org/TR/activitypub/
[ActivityStreams]: https://www.w3.org/TR/activitystreams-core/
[DuckTyping]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Duck_typing

## Copyright

CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0) Public Domain Dedication

To the extent possible under law, the authors of this Fediverse Enhancement Proposal have waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this work.
